#LYT 

> *With books it’s a bit harder for me to do what #NickMilo  is suggesting - to have a semblance of a conversation with the author, but with audio-based content it’s a breeze - in this case Extraction is trivial because it’s just me arguing with the author whenever I feel like hitting a pause and saying something. I then record and auto-transcribe the notes. This fact has also shifted me to prefer listening to reading, which is not always possible or ideal.
> As for highlighting - I have never been a huge fan of the highlight/highlight-the-highlights approach because it never really helped me retain any knowledge. Trying to understand, failing, trying again - these things work because it’s how our biology is wired to work, but just bashing my mind against highlights never worked.
> Studying math and highlighting a proof would do literally NOTHING for me in comparison to translating the proof from the mathematical notation to plain human language and providing remarks as to what’s actually going on.
> It does **help** to highlight with really dense and new material - just to build a list of concepts and to map out the general feeling for the topic. But if one is dealing with such challenging material Highlighting would still be less bang for your buck than spending most of your time Extracting.
> Imo that’s because extraction involves quite a bit of repeated failure (to explain a concept to yourself, to find good words to describe it, to find examples and connections - we fail at these things until our mind comes up with a solution or grinds to a halt, which is also a type of mistake/failure). Loving the feeling of making mistakes is a prerequisite for learning a ton of stuff - our brain really responds to making errors and needing to correct itself. There is way too little mental stimulation that would provide a challenge when one is in highlight-the-highlights mode. It engages more of the “learning through repetition” pathway, which is not ideal for mental skills and is more suitable for physical skills (allows for less injuries and helps build up the reflexive automatism in movements)*


>*For me, I realise - and this video lays bare - the idea that the traditional, collectors mode of interacting with ideas trades what is easy for what is valuable. There’s no friction to highlighting, there’s no cost, so it’s no problem to drag my pen across the text or click a few buttons.
>But the actual cost is a system _full_ of other peoples’ ideas. If you don’t spend time developing your version of these ideas then of course you’re not going to want to spend time in there: you don’t know what’s interesting for you in there.
>The less time you spend on developing your thoughts, the more you fill your system with other people’s ideas, the less welcome you feel in your own system. A negative feedback loop.
>I feel like this is the root of my shiny new thing syndrome - previously all the tools I used ended up the same way: full of stuff, vanishingly little of which felt like mine. Spending more time _developing_ my ideas feels like - I don’t know… a cheat code? a gift? Whatever it is, it feels empowering and uplifting. You get out what you put in.*


(Unfortunately) Information consumption and information assimilation, in my head, are still two different tasks. Assimilation follows consumption; the process is linear.  
When I’m reading something, I want to focus on consuming the content. Processing the ideas in the text, using my own words, challenging assumptions, considering my own perspectives - these things take time, brain-work, and breaks the flow of simply reading. But at the same time, I don’t want to forget. Highlighting gives me a false sense of productivity and is not as time or energy intensive as truly engaging with the content. This is why I’ve been highlighting waaaay more than I should.

I’ve been trying to get out of the habit.  
Taking down questions instead of directly copying/highlighting has really helped me. Thinking of questions is easier than summarising in your own words, less time consuming too. I don’t have to bother with the answer for now, I can just continue reading/listening. It’s like having a dialogue with the author/creator of the content I’m consuming - but all you have to do is challenge without consequence or thinking too much. It keeps a check of ideas, and is a great segue to when I want to develop evergreen notes.